README.md, before:

# Softcore SoC on Zybo Z7-10

A small 16-bit FPGA softcore “ecosystem” based on (and adapted from) Gray’s GR0040 RISC CPU design, wrapped into a SoC together with **hardware vectored interrupts**, **Harvard BRAM**, and a handful of MMIO peripherals.

This repo contains the Vivado project targeting the **Zybo Z7-10 (XC7Z010)**, plus a Python assembler and example bare-metal programs.

## Highlights

- 16-bit RISC CPU (GR0040) with 16 GPRs (`r0..r15`) and fixed-width 16-bit ISA
- GR0041 wrapper around the CPU for interrupt-aware execution (tracks ISR nesting context)
- Hardware vectored interrupt controller with fixed vectors and limited nesting/preemption
- Harvard 1 KiB true dual-port BRAM with byte lanes (hi/lo) and byte enables
- MMIO peripheral bus mapped to `0x8000–0x8FFF`
- Peripherals: Timer0, Timer1 (higher priority), PARIO (4-bit), UART (RX interrupt)
- Python two-pass assembler with `.include` and macro support

## Repository layout

- `srcs/` – Verilog RTL
	- `m_soc.v` – top-level `soc` (CPU + BRAM + MMIO bus)
	- `m_gr0040.v` – GR0040 CPU core
	- `m_gr0041.v` – GR0041 wrapper around GR0040
	- `m_periph_bus.v` – MMIO decode/mux + IRQ wiring
	- `m_irq_ctrl.v` – interrupt controller
	- `m_timer16.v`, `m_timerH.v` – timers
	- `m_uart_mmio.v`, `m_uart_rx.v`, `m_uart_tx.v` – UART blocks
	- `m_bram.v` – 1 KiB hi/lo BRAM model (init from hex files)
	- `m_pario.v` – simple parallel I/O
	- `mem/` – BRAM init hex images (`mem_hi.hex`, `mem_lo.hex`)
- `sim/` – testbenches
	- `tb_Soc.v` – SoC testbench (optional UART MMIO self-test)
- `tools/` – software tools
	- `assembler.py` – assembler that emits BRAM init images
	- `abi.inc` – ABI register aliases + convenience macros
- `assembly/` – example assembly programs
	- `input.asm` – vector table + ISRs + small ABI tests
- `constraints/` – Zybo XDC constraints (and optional ILA constraints)
- `docs/` – LaTeX programmer’s guide + implementation notes

## Quickstart

### Prerequisites

- Vivado (preferrably **Vivado 2025.1**)
- Python **3.7+** for the assembler
- Board: Zybo Z7-10 (or adapt constraints for your board)

### 1) Assemble a program into BRAM init hex

The BRAM model loads two byte-lane files (hi/lo). Generate them from an assembly program:

```bash
# Defaults:
#   input:  assembly/input.asm
#   output: srcs/mem/mem.hex + srcs/mem/mem_hi.hex + srcs/mem/mem_lo.hex
python3 tools/assembler.py
```

Notes:
- The assembler uses *byte addresses* in `.org`/labels, but internally tracks locations in *words* and enforces alignment.
- `.include` is supported (used by `input.asm` to pull in `abi.inc`).

### 2) Run simulation (Vivado xsim)

Open the project (`processor.xpr`) in Vivado and run simulation with `tb_Soc`.

Useful defines in `sim/tb_Soc.v`:
- `SIM` – uses a much faster UART baud rate for simulation
- `TB_USE_INTERNALS` – exposes internal DUT signals and prints IRQ/UART activity
- `TB_UART_MMIO_TEST` – bypasses the CPU and directly pokes UART MMIO registers

The testbench writes a VCD: `waves_soc.vcd`.

### 3) Build bitstream & program hardware

1. Open `processor.xpr` in Vivado
2. Run synthesis + implementation
3. Generate bitstream (`.bit`)
4. Program the Zybo Z7-10 via **Hardware Manager**

If you use ILA debug, you’ll also need the generated `.ltx`.

## Architecture overview

### Top-level SoC

The top-level module is `srcs/m_soc.v`:

- Instantiates GR0041 (GR0040 CPU + IRQ wrapper)
- Instantiates a 1 KiB dual-port BRAM (`srcs/m_bram.v`)
- Instantiates the peripheral bus (`srcs/m_periph_bus.v`)

Instruction fetch is synchronous: the BRAM instruction output is registered into an instruction latch (`insn_q`). A taken branch annuls the fall-through by injecting a NOP.

### Addressing model

- Software-visible addresses are **byte addresses**.
- Internally, the BRAM is word-indexed using `addr[9:1]` (bit 0 is used as a byte-lane selector for `SB`).
- MMIO is selected by `d_ad[15] == 1` (i.e., `0x8000–0xFFFF`), with this design using `0x8000–0x8FFF`.

### Global memory map (byte addressing)

- `0x0000–0x03FF` – 1 KiB BRAM (code + data)
- `0x0020–0x009F` – interrupt vector region (fixed entry points)
- `0x0100` – reset vector (default PC after reset)
- `0x8000–0x8FFF` – MMIO window

### MMIO decode

MMIO is decoded by `addr[11:8]` in `srcs/m_periph_bus.v`:

| Address range | Block |
|---:|---|
| `0x8000–0x80FF` | Timer0 (`timer16`) |
| `0x8100–0x81FF` | Timer1 (`timerH`, higher priority) |
| `0x8200–0x82FF` | PARIO |
| `0x8300–0x83FF` | UART MMIO |
| `0x8F00–0x8FFF` | IRQ controller regs |

### Peripheral register maps

#### Timer0 / Timer1

Timer0 base `0x8000`, Timer1 base `0x8100`:

| Address | Name | Meaning |
|---:|---|---|
| `BASE+0x0` | CR0 | `[0]=int_en`, `[1]=timer_mode` |
| `BASE+0x2` | CR1 | `[0]=int_req` (write-any clears) |
| `BASE+0x4` | CNT | counter value (debug read) |

#### PARIO (4-bit)

Base `0x8200`:

| Address | Meaning |
|---:|---|
| `0x8200` | write: `par_o[3:0]`, read: `par_o[3:0]` |
| `0x8202` | read: `par_i[3:0]` |

Current RTL asserts a PARIO IRQ when `par_i == 4'hF`.

#### UART MMIO

Base `0x8300`:

| Address | Name | Meaning |
|---:|---|---|
| `0x8300` | DATA | write: enqueue TX byte (if not busy); read: last RX byte (also clears `rx_pending`) |
| `0x8302` | STATUS | bit0 `tx_busy`, bit1 `rx_pending` (write with `wdata[1]=1` clears `rx_pending`) |

The UART asserts its interrupt request when RX data is pending.

#### IRQ controller regs

IRQ controller base `0x8F00`. The controller is word-indexed internally via `addr[3:1]`, which corresponds to these byte offsets:

| Address | Name | Access | Meaning |
|---:|---|---|---|
| `0x8F00` | `IRQ_PEND` | R | pending bitfield |
| `0x8F04` | `IRQ_MASK` | R/W | enable mask (1=enabled) |
| `0x8F08` | `IRQ_FORCE` | W | set pending bits (`pending |= wdata[7:0]`) |
| `0x8F0C` | `IRQ_CLEAR` | W | clear pending bits (`pending &= ~wdata[7:0]`) |

Priority is fixed (higher IRQ index wins) and a small priority stack enables limited nesting/preemption (see `DEPTH` in `srcs/m_irq_ctrl.v`).

### Interrupt vectors

The interrupt controller generates **hardware vectors**:

| Source | Vector |
|---|---:|
| Timer0 | `0x0020` |
| Timer1 | `0x0040` |
| PARIO | `0x0060` |
| UART (RX pending) | `0x0080` |

An example vector table + ISRs live in `sw-programs/input.asm`.

## Documentation

The full programmer’s guide / implementation notes are in:

- `docs/docs.tex`
- `docs/docs-implementation.tex`

## Practical notes / gotchas

- `srcs/m_bram.v` initializes BRAM from `srcs/mem/mem_hi.hex` and `srcs/mem/mem_lo.hex` by default. You can override paths at sim-time with `+MEM_HEX_HI=...` and `+MEM_HEX_LO=...`.
- In Vivado/xsim runs (when `SIM` is defined), the default paths are set up to work from Vivado’s generated `processor.sim/.../behav/xsim/` directory (repo root is typically `../../../../`). For fully deterministic CI, prefer passing explicit `+MEM_HEX_HI=... +MEM_HEX_LO=...`.
- UART baud rate is compile-time selectable in `srcs/m_periph_bus.v`: `SIM` builds use a much faster baud for testbench convenience.

## Credits

- Original GR0040 concepts based on Gray’s “Designing a Simple FPGA-Optimized RISC CPU and System-on-a-Chip” (see references in the LaTeX docs).

Commit message:

Update README with repository cloning instructions
Added instructions for cloning the repository and importing the .xpr file into Vivado.

README.md, after:

# Softcore SoC on Zybo Z7-10

A small 16-bit FPGA softcore “ecosystem” based on (and adapted from) Gray’s GR0040 RISC CPU design, wrapped into a SoC together with **hardware vectored interrupts**, **Harvard BRAM**, and a handful of MMIO peripherals.

This repo contains the Vivado project targeting the **Zybo Z7-10 (XC7Z010)**, plus a Python assembler and example bare-metal programs.

## Highlights

- 16-bit RISC CPU (GR0040) with 16 GPRs (`r0..r15`) and fixed-width 16-bit ISA
- GR0041 wrapper around the CPU for interrupt-aware execution (tracks ISR nesting context)
- Hardware vectored interrupt controller with fixed vectors and limited nesting/preemption
- Harvard 1 KiB true dual-port BRAM with byte lanes (hi/lo) and byte enables
- MMIO peripheral bus mapped to `0x8000–0x8FFF`
- Peripherals: Timer0, Timer1 (higher priority), PARIO (4-bit), UART (RX interrupt)
- Python two-pass assembler with `.include` and macro support

## Repository layout

- `srcs/` – Verilog RTL
	- `m_soc.v` – top-level `soc` (CPU + BRAM + MMIO bus)
	- `m_gr0040.v` – GR0040 CPU core
	- `m_gr0041.v` – GR0041 wrapper around GR0040
	- `m_periph_bus.v` – MMIO decode/mux + IRQ wiring
	- `m_irq_ctrl.v` – interrupt controller
	- `m_timer16.v`, `m_timerH.v` – timers
	- `m_uart_mmio.v`, `m_uart_rx.v`, `m_uart_tx.v` – UART blocks
	- `m_bram.v` – 1 KiB hi/lo BRAM model (init from hex files)
	- `m_pario.v` – simple parallel I/O
	- `mem/` – BRAM init hex images (`mem_hi.hex`, `mem_lo.hex`)
- `sim/` – testbenches
	- `tb_Soc.v` – SoC testbench (optional UART MMIO self-test)
- `tools/` – software tools
	- `assembler.py` – assembler that emits BRAM init images
	- `abi.inc` – ABI register aliases + convenience macros
- `assembly/` – example assembly programs
	- `input.asm` – vector table + ISRs + small ABI tests
- `constraints/` – Zybo XDC constraints (and optional ILA constraints)
- `docs/` – LaTeX programmer’s guide + implementation notes

## Quickstart

### Prerequisites

- Vivado (preferrably **Vivado 2025.1**)
- Python **3.7+** for the assembler
- Board: Zybo Z7-10 (or adapt constraints for your board)

### 0) Clone the repository and import the .xpr (Xilinx Project) file
```bash
git clone https://github.com/jssilvaa/verilog-processor && cd verilog-processor/
```
Open the Vivado Design Suite™ and import the .xpr file in the project root. 
Verify the hierarchy of the project:
- In the design sources, check if the SoC module `m_soc.v` is selected as top.
- In the simulation sources, check if the testbench `tb_Soc.v` is selected as top.
If not, right-click and "Select as Project/Hierarchy root".
Any other issues, refer to the Troubleshooting section. 

### 1) Assemble a program into BRAM init hex

The BRAM model loads two byte-lane files (hi/lo). Generate them from an assembly program:

```bash
# Defaults:
#   input:  assembly/input.asm
#   output: srcs/mem/mem.hex + srcs/mem/mem_hi.hex + srcs/mem/mem_lo.hex
python3 tools/assembler.py
```

Notes:
- The assembler uses *byte addresses* in `.org`/labels, but internally tracks locations in *words* and enforces alignment.
- `.include` is supported (used by `input.asm` to pull in `abi.inc`).

### 2) Run simulation (Vivado xsim)

Open the project (`processor.xpr`) in Vivado and run simulation with `tb_Soc`.

Useful defines in `sim/tb_Soc.v`:
- `SIM` – uses a much faster UART baud rate for simulation
- `TB_USE_INTERNALS` – exposes internal DUT signals and prints IRQ/UART activity
- `TB_UART_MMIO_TEST` – bypasses the CPU and directly pokes UART MMIO registers

The testbench writes a VCD: `waves_soc.vcd`.

### 3) Build bitstream & program hardware

1. Open `processor.xpr` in Vivado
2. Run synthesis + implementation
3. Generate bitstream (`.bit`)
4. Program the Zybo Z7-10 via **Hardware Manager**

If you use ILA debug, you’ll also need the generated `.ltx`.

## Architecture overview

### Top-level SoC

The top-level module is `srcs/m_soc.v`:

- Instantiates GR0041 (GR0040 CPU + IRQ wrapper)
- Instantiates a 1 KiB dual-port BRAM (`srcs/m_bram.v`)
- Instantiates the peripheral bus (`srcs/m_periph_bus.v`)

Instruction fetch is synchronous: the BRAM instruction output is registered into an instruction latch (`insn_q`). A taken branch annuls the fall-through by injecting a NOP.

### Addressing model

- Software-visible addresses are **byte addresses**.
- Internally, the BRAM is word-indexed using `addr[9:1]` (bit 0 is used as a byte-lane selector for `SB`).
- MMIO is selected by `d_ad[15] == 1` (i.e., `0x8000–0xFFFF`), with this design using `0x8000–0x8FFF`.

### Global memory map (byte addressing)

- `0x0000–0x03FF` – 1 KiB BRAM (code + data)
- `0x0020–0x009F` – interrupt vector region (fixed entry points)
- `0x0100` – reset vector (default PC after reset)
- `0x8000–0x8FFF` – MMIO window

### MMIO decode

MMIO is decoded by `addr[11:8]` in `srcs/m_periph_bus.v`:

| Address range | Block |
|---:|---|
| `0x8000–0x80FF` | Timer0 (`timer16`) |
| `0x8100–0x81FF` | Timer1 (`timerH`, higher priority) |
| `0x8200–0x82FF` | PARIO |
| `0x8300–0x83FF` | UART MMIO |
| `0x8F00–0x8FFF` | IRQ controller regs |

### Peripheral register maps

#### Timer0 / Timer1

Timer0 base `0x8000`, Timer1 base `0x8100`:

| Address | Name | Meaning |
|---:|---|---|
| `BASE+0x0` | CR0 | `[0]=int_en`, `[1]=timer_mode` |
| `BASE+0x2` | CR1 | `[0]=int_req` (write-any clears) |
| `BASE+0x4` | CNT | counter value (debug read) |

#### PARIO (4-bit)

Base `0x8200`:

| Address | Meaning |
|---:|---|
| `0x8200` | write: `par_o[3:0]`, read: `par_o[3:0]` |
| `0x8202` | read: `par_i[3:0]` |

Current RTL asserts a PARIO IRQ when `par_i == 4'hF`.

#### UART MMIO

Base `0x8300`:

| Address | Name | Meaning |
|---:|---|---|
| `0x8300` | DATA | write: enqueue TX byte (if not busy); read: last RX byte (also clears `rx_pending`) |
| `0x8302` | STATUS | bit0 `tx_busy`, bit1 `rx_pending` (write with `wdata[1]=1` clears `rx_pending`) |

The UART asserts its interrupt request when RX data is pending.

#### IRQ controller regs

IRQ controller base `0x8F00`. The controller is word-indexed internally via `addr[3:1]`, which corresponds to these byte offsets:

| Address | Name | Access | Meaning |
|---:|---|---|---|
| `0x8F00` | `IRQ_PEND` | R | pending bitfield |
| `0x8F04` | `IRQ_MASK` | R/W | enable mask (1=enabled) |
| `0x8F08` | `IRQ_FORCE` | W | set pending bits (`pending |= wdata[7:0]`) |
| `0x8F0C` | `IRQ_CLEAR` | W | clear pending bits (`pending &= ~wdata[7:0]`) |

Priority is fixed (higher IRQ index wins) and a small priority stack enables limited nesting/preemption (see `DEPTH` in `srcs/m_irq_ctrl.v`).

### Interrupt vectors

The interrupt controller generates **hardware vectors**:

| Source | Vector |
|---|---:|
| Timer0 | `0x0020` |
| Timer1 | `0x0040` |
| PARIO | `0x0060` |
| UART (RX pending) | `0x0080` |

An example vector table + ISRs live in `sw-programs/input.asm`.

## Documentation

The full programmer’s guide / implementation notes are in:

- `docs/docs.tex`
- `docs/docs-implementation.tex`

## Practical notes / gotchas

- `srcs/m_bram.v` initializes BRAM from `srcs/mem/mem_hi.hex` and `srcs/mem/mem_lo.hex` by default. You can override paths at sim-time with `+MEM_HEX_HI=...` and `+MEM_HEX_LO=...`.
- In Vivado/xsim runs (when `SIM` is defined), the default paths are set up to work from Vivado’s generated `processor.sim/.../behav/xsim/` directory (repo root is typically `../../../../`). For fully deterministic CI, prefer passing explicit `+MEM_HEX_HI=... +MEM_HEX_LO=...`.
- UART baud rate is compile-time selectable in `srcs/m_periph_bus.v`: `SIM` builds use a much faster baud for testbench convenience.

## Credits

- Original GR0040 concepts based on Gray’s “Designing a Simple FPGA-Optimized RISC CPU and System-on-a-Chip” (see references in the LaTeX docs).
